1)
PLANNING A FREE/LIBRE COMMUNITY NETWORK

2a)
The key ingredient to start a community network is the community!

2b)
As a starting point, it's necessary to form a group of people interested in working for the autonomy of their communications, who feel the necessity to implement this project that's very technological, yet, above all, very social.

3)
Planning
Analyze our community
Organize action
Think about financing
Organize administration
Plan the deployment

4a)
Analyze our community

4b)
Sociocultural analysis connects factors of the social context, which together with an understanding of the needs, norms, and values that define our community, allows us to design appropriate solutions.

4c)
Analysis of our reality as a community will help us make wise collective decisions and create an identity that represents us.
Decisions about the characteristics of our free/libre community network will be made based on the type of relations that exist in our community.
This is why it's so important to do this analysis: to foresee the limitations and necessities that may arise in our network project with respect to the people who will use it and the ways they'll use it.

5a)
To guide yourself in this analysis, you can think about:

5b)
What causes motivate the construction of a free/libre community network?
How many inhabitants does the community have?
Who would use the network and for what?
You can also do an informal census that records age groups, gender, or other relevant characteristics.
It's important to consider if any particular condition such as a seasonal work activity makes the population grow or shrink abruptly according to the time of year.
What activities predominate in the area and how could the network affect them?
Is there a recurring threat?
What knowledge of and access to Internet devices do the network members have?
Based on experiences of previous projects, what level of social committment exists in the community?

6a)
The ideal is to create a networks that's both digital and made of people with strong relationships to the community. To achieve this objective, the inclusion and participation of community entities and spaces is very important, such as schools, clubs, government entities, media, housing, cultural centers, plazas, and public transit stops.

6b)
To give a few examples: There are networks in touristic localities that have to limit access during vacation times in order to maintain the good functioning of the network. Other localities have made a "godparents" arrangement to assist families that for various cultural reasons find it impossible to manage their network node themselves. There are also localities that have decided to leave their network accessible and open in public areas given the complete absence of coverage of other communication services.

7a)
Organize action

7b)
Designing an organization of the work, communication, learning, and gatherings that involves and inspires all to participate is a big challenge and is vital for the functioning of a free/libre community network.

7c)
Commonly, when people gather to work collectively, the diversity among people highlights unique attitudes and personal knowledge that are complementary to each other.
Defining roles, collective work areas, and internal communication practices enables self-management to keep the project going long-term.
Choosing a name for the nework and designing a logo or representative image supports the creation of collective identity. Making a web site can do the same.

8a)
Defining short- and long-term goals helps speed up and clearly orient group work processes.  In addition, it encourages members to take on proactive roles in the resolution of problems and collective participation in decision making.
It's to be expected that network members will show different degrees of committment. Some will dedicate more effort than others or develop different abilities.
Due to this, it's healthy to define a minimum committment that all members should meet in order to participate in the project.
The elaboration and sharing of the network's characteristics -- such as conversation about what the network is, how it's members should act, and their specific roles -- gives clarity to the project.

9a)
Periodic in-person meetings are a very important tool for creating community spaces, and for making decisions, sharing knowledge, planning, and resolving problems. Meeting also offers a space where collective and community identity is built and invites other people to join the network.

9b)
To give some examples: there are networks that have mi-monthly meetings with an agenda created ahead of time with topics to discuss and with written minutes made during the meeting. Is this way a summary can be shared with the people unable to attend and can also be put in an archive of the network.
In other cases, talks and workshops are organized for the people who wish to be part of the network. On occasion, the meetings are mandatory for new members.
In some networks, frequent conversation among network members happens via group communication tools, exchanging opinions, specific problems, or information.

10a)
Think about financing

10b)
Doing an economic analysis will allow us to estimate and plan the monetary investment necessary to implement the project and sustain it over time.

10c)
Knowing how much money is needed for our network to function will allow us to evaluate diverse mechanisms of self-management and financing for the different phases of purchasing, construction, installtion, repair, growth, and upgrading of the network.
So, on one hand, it's necessary to consider how much money and other resource we need, and, on the other hand, how we will obtain them.

11a)
There are diverse ways to get resources, such as:

11b)
Donation and non-monetary exchange, such as barter
Direct financing such as subscriptions, monthly network membership dues, or donations
Shared capital such as mutual aid funds
Participation of foundations or community associations
Public financing such as subsidies or partnerships with government entities
Donations or contributions made by businesses
Events organized to raise funds, among others...
A combination of options makes the project more sustainable.

12a)
Deployment and initial construction of the network tends to be the most complex and demanding moment, since in addition to the nodes, it's necessary to acquire the tools and necessary materials and also keep in mind some extra money to buy replacements.
Bulk or wholesale purchases by groups notably reduces costs and creates availability of materials, but at the same time requires a larger monetary investment.

12b) 
To give some examples of how we can think about financing, we can loos at community networks where each person who joins takes on the costs of their node individually. In other networks, the node is only paid for when installed, and repairs and upgrades are paid from a collective fund created by monthly contributions from each member.
There's also a network in which the first nodes were financed by and NGO, the Internet link was handled by a local ISP, and the network members carried out the installation.

13a)
Organize the administration

13b)
Keeping a reliable record maintained by the network members who want to take on the role of administrators is vital for the organized and ordered functioning of the network.

13c)
This allows us to have collective knowledge of the movement of money, materials, tools, and other resources. Some of the most common records are:
Purchases made and planned
Inventory of materials and tools, with the places where they're kept
List of prices of available materials, thinking about their replacement
Details of money and other value put into the network
Archive of agreements and documents important to the project
Calendar of periodic responsibilities, payments, reports, etc...
Contact directory

14a)
Plan the deployment/installation

14b)
Doing a technical analysis before the network deployment allows for efficient organizing of the tasks and resources. Having everything necessary at the moment of carrying out a task helps that the group be agile and tidy and that the task gets finished on time and in good shape. This includes both the material and the knowledge necessary for carrying out the task.

14c)
While there are numerous technolgical alternatives for the construction of a community network, this model proposes the LibreRouter as the primary device. The LibreRouter makes deployment of libre community networks easier since is was designed with this objective.
The vast majority of nodes in the network will not present great challenges. However, there will be cases that require more creative and more technical attention. It can even be necessary to collaborate with people beyond the network who have specific knowledge to solve particular problems.

15a)
The members with a more technical profile could debate, for example, the following topics:

15b)
What will be the structure of the network, both in the beginning and as it grows
How to stregthen the network by building redundant links and thus reaching the same point via more than one path
Identify nodes with more data traffic or overburdened and guarantee their proper functioning
Create multiple paths to relevant points in the network, such as the connection with the Internet or with local servers
Identify the need for specific or more powerful devices
Solve issues of unconventional electrical energy
Help with methods for sharing services and content on the network

15c)
In some cases, it can be necessary to mount nodes with different antennas than the rest of the nodes, and it can also be convenient to deploy sections of the network with cable instead of wireless links. Some situations will demand unconventional electrical sources or backup power supplies with batteries. Each network will present its technical peculiarities that should be solved with patience, creativity, and collaboration both within and beyond the network.
